---
layout: news
title: Msprime 1.3.0!
description: |
  Msprime 1.3.0 introduces the ability to record specific node types as well as edges 
  for coalescing nodes along non-coalescing segments.
timestamp: 2023-12-25
author: Gertjan Bisschop
---

# Msprime 1.3.0

Msprime 1.3.0 introduces a new flexible way to store information on the ancestors associated with a custom subset of 
all possible events that might happen in the history of a sample. This means we can now simulate tree sequences 
with varying degrees of detail ranging from the default fully simplified series of local trees 
all the way to recording a fully detailed history as currently enabled by the `record_full_arg` flag.
This new feature has been implemented for all ancestry models implemented in msprime. 
Lastly, this new release enables the simulation of microsatellite repeats. This last feature builds on the existing  
general `MatrixMutationModel` class to represent the evolution of alleles containing a certain number of repeats.

## Brief summary of changes

### 1. Additional nodes

In msprime we usually want to simulate the coalescent with recombination and represent the output as 
simply as possible. As a result, we don’t store individual recombination events, but rather their 
effects on the output tree sequence. We also do not explicitly store common ancestor events that do not 
result in marginal coalescences. For some purposes, however, we want record information on other events 
of interest, not just the mimimal representation of its outcome.

The newly implemented `additional_nodes` API serves this exact purpose. This allows us to record the nodes 
associated with a custom subset of all events we might observe in the history of a sample. Besides sampled 
genomes and coalescence events, nodes can now also represent common ancestors, as well as ancestors associated 
with recombination, gene conversion, migration, and pass through events.

The code below contains a small working example on how to specify this custom subset of node types. Because 
a single node can be involved in multiple types of events bitwise operations on the node flags 
are used to encode the various possibilities.

```python
import msprime
import numpy as np

ts = msprime.sim_ancestry(
    samples=10,
    recombination_rate=1e-8,
    population_size=1e4,
    sequence_length=1e5,
    random_seed=45,
    additional_nodes=(
         msprime.NodeType.RECOMBINANT |
         msprime.NodeType.COMMON_ANCESTOR
         ),
    coalescing_segments_only=False
)

def count_flags(ts):
    counter = dict()
    for nodetype in msprime.NodeType:
        flags = np.bitwise_and(ts.nodes_flags, nodetype.value)
        counter[nodetype.name] = np.sum(flags > 0)

    return counter

print(count_flags(ts))
```

    {'RECOMBINANT': 388, 'COMMON_ANCESTOR': 107, 'MIGRANT': 0, 'CENSUS': 0, 'GENE_CONVERSION': 0, 'PASS_THROUGH': 0}    



### 2. Microsat mutation model

We have implemented a number of mutational models that are commonly used to model the evolution of microsatellite repeats. 
The basic idea here is that the number of copies of a given repeat is tracked, and its evolution over time subject to one 
of a number of potential biases. The alleles in MicrosatMutationModels represent the copy number of the repeat, 
not the actual sequences observed.

The example below shows how to simulate microsat repeats under the Stepwise Mutation Model (Ohta and Kimura, 1978).   

```python
ts = msprime.sim_ancestry(
    5, 
    random_seed=2, 
    sequence_length=20,
    recombination_rate=0.5, 
    population_size=100_000
)
model = msprime.SMM(lo=1, hi=10)
mts = msprime.sim_mutations(ts, rate=5e-7, model=model, random_seed=1)
for var in mts.variants():
    print("Site at:", var.site.position)
    print("    Alleles:", var.alleles)
    print("    Genotypes:", var.genotypes)
```
    Site at: 4.0
        Alleles: ('4', '5', '6')
        Genotypes: [1 1 1 1 1 2 2 1 1 0]
    Site at: 8.0
        Alleles: ('6', '5')
        Genotypes: [0 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 0]
    Site at: 9.0
        Alleles: ('10', '9')
        Genotypes: [0 1 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0]
    Site at: 11.0
        Alleles: ('7', '8')
        Genotypes: [1 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1]
    Site at: 13.0
        Alleles: ('4', '3')
        Genotypes: [1 0 0 0 0 0 1 1 1 0]
    Site at: 15.0
        Alleles: ('7', '6')
        Genotypes: [0 1 1 0 1 0 1 0 1 0]
    Site at: 17.0
        Alleles: ('6', '5', '7', '8')
        Genotypes: [3 3 1 3 1 3 1 3 3 1]
    Site at: 19.0
        Alleles: ('10', '9')
        Genotypes: [0 1 0 0 1 0 1 0 0 0]

# Feedback etc

Please post a discussion or an issue on the `msprime` [GitHub repository](https://github.com/tskit-dev/msprime) 
if you have any problems. We hope the update to `msprime` version 1.3 is useful in your research.
